
Unsupervised learning
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search

This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)
This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. (May 2010)
This article includes a list of references, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. (February 2010)
Machine learning and
data mining
Kernel Machine.svg
Problems[show]
Supervised learning
(classification • regression)
[show]
Clustering[show]
Dimensionality reduction[show]
Structured prediction[show]
Anomaly detection[show]
Neural nets[show]
Reinforcement learning[show]
Theory[show]
Machine-learning venues[show]
Glossary of artificial intelligence[show]
Related articles[show]
Portal-puzzle.svg Machine learning portal
vte
Unsupervised learning is a branch of machine learning that learns from test data that has not been labeled, classified or categorized. Instead of responding to feedback, unsupervised learning identifies commonalities in the data and reacts based on the presence or absence of such commonalities in each new piece of data. Alternative include supervised learning and reinforcement learning.

A central application of unsupervised learning is in the field of density estimation in statistics,[1] though unsupervised learning encompasses many other domains involving summarizing and explaining data features.


Contents
1	Approaches
2	Neural networks
3	Method of moments
4	See also
5	Notes
6	Further reading
Approaches

This article is in a list format that may be better presented using prose. You can help by converting this article to prose, if appropriate. Editing help is available. (September 2018)
Compared to supervised learning where training data is labeled with the appropriate classifications, models using unsupervised learning must learn relationships between elements in a data set and classify the raw data without "help." This hunt for relationships can take many different algorithmic forms, but all models have the same goal of mimicking human logic by searching for indirect hidden structures, patterns or features to analyze new data.[2]

Some of the most common algorithms used in unsupervised learning include:

Clustering
hierarchical clustering,[3]
k-means
mixture models
DBSCAN
OPTICS algorithm
Anomaly detection
Local Outlier Factor
Neural Networks
Autoencoders
Deep Belief Nets
Hebbian Learning
Generative Adversarial Networks
Self-organizing map
Approaches for learning latent variable models such as
Expectation–maximization algorithm (EM)
Method of moments
Blind signal separation techniques
Principal component analysis
Independent component analysis
Non-negative matrix factorization
Singular value decomposition
Neural networks
The classical example of unsupervised learning in the study of neural networks is Donald Hebb's principle, that is, neurons that fire together wire together. In Hebbian learning, the connection is reinforced irrespective of an error, but is exclusively a function of the coincidence between action potentials between the two neurons. A similar version that modifies synaptic weights takes into account the time between the action potentials (spike-timing-dependent plasticity or STDP). Hebbian Learning has been hypothesized to underlie a range of cognitive functions, such as pattern recognition and experiential learning.

Among neural network models, the self-organizing map (SOM) and adaptive resonance theory (ART) are commonly used in unsupervised learning algorithms. The SOM is a topographic organization in which nearby locations in the map represent inputs with similar properties. The ART model allows the number of clusters to vary with problem size and lets the user control the degree of similarity between members of the same clusters by means of a user-defined constant called the vigilance parameter. ART networks are used for many pattern recognition tasks, such as automatic target recognition and seismic signal processing.[4]

Method of moments
One of the statistical approaches for unsupervised learning is the method of moments. In the method of moments, the unknown parameters (of interest) in the model are related to the moments of one or more random variables, and thus, these unknown parameters can be estimated given the moments. The moments are usually estimated from samples empirically. The basic moments are first and second order moments. For a random vector, the first order moment is the mean vector, and the second order moment is the covariance matrix (when the mean is zero). Higher order moments are usually represented using tensors which are the generalization of matrices to higher orders as multi-dimensional arrays.

In particular, the method of moments is shown to be effective in learning the parameters of latent variable models.[5] Latent variable models are statistical models where in addition to the observed variables, a set of latent variables also exists which is not observed. A highly practical example of latent variable models in machine learning is the topic modeling which is a statistical model for generating the words (observed variables) in the document based on the topic (latent variable) of the document. In the topic modeling, the words in the document are generated according to different statistical parameters when the topic of the document is changed. It is shown that method of moments (tensor decomposition techniques) consistently recover the parameters of a large class of latent variable models under some assumptions.[5]

The Expectation–maximization algorithm (EM) is also one of the most practical methods for learning latent variable models. However, it can get stuck in local optima, and it is not guaranteed that the algorithm will converge to the true unknown parameters of the model. In contrast, for the method of moments, the global convergence is guaranteed under some conditions.[5]

See also
Automated machine learning
Cluster analysis
Anomaly detection
Expectation–maximization algorithm
Generative topographic map
Meta-learning (computer science)
Multivariate analysis
Radial basis function network
Hebbian Theory
Notes
 Jordan, Michael I.; Bishop, Christopher M. (2004). "Neural Networks". In Allen B. Tucker. Computer Science Handbook, Second Edition (Section VII: Intelligent Systems). Boca Raton, Florida: Chapman & Hall/CRC Press LLC. ISBN 1-58488-360-X.
 "Build with AI | DeepAI". DeepAI. Retrieved 2018-09-30.
 Hastie, Trevor, Robert Tibshirani, Friedman, Jerome (2009). The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data mining, Inference, and Prediction. New York: Springer. pp. 485–586. ISBN 978-0-387-84857-0.
 Carpenter, G.A. & Grossberg, S. (1988). "The ART of adaptive pattern recognition by a self-organizing neural network" (PDF). Computer. 21: 77–88. doi:10.1109/2.33.
 Anandkumar, Animashree; Ge, Rong; Hsu, Daniel; Kakade, Sham; Telgarsky, Matus (2014). "Tensor Decompositions for Learning Latent Variable Models" (PDF). Journal of Machine Learning Research (JMLR). 15: 2773–2832.
Further reading
Bousquet, O.; von Luxburg, U.; Raetsch, G., eds. (2004). Advanced Lectures on Machine Learning. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3540231226.
Duda, Richard O.; Hart, Peter E.; Stork, David G. (2001). "Unsupervised Learning and Clustering". Pattern classification (2nd ed.). Wiley. ISBN 0-471-05669-3.
Hastie, Trevor; Tibshirani, Robert (2009). The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data mining, Inference, and Prediction. New York: Springer. pp. 485–586. doi:10.1007/978-0-387-84858-7_14. ISBN 978-0-387-84857-0.
Hinton, Geoffrey; Sejnowski, Terrence J., eds. (1999). Unsupervised Learning: Foundations of Neural Computation. MIT Press. ISBN 0-262-58168-X. (This book focuses on unsupervised learning in neural networks)
Categories: Unsupervised learningMachine learning
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version

Languages
???????
????????
Espanol
Francais
Polski
Русский
Turkce
Українська
??
11 more
Edit links
This page was last edited on 1 October 2018, at 01:56 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki
